COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE INFORMATION

This directory tree contains translations to Java(TM) source code of
copyrighted Numerical Recipes(TM) Third Edition C++ source code.  For
copyright purposes, the Java translations are derivative works of the
Numerical Recipes C++ source code.

Unless otherwise indicated in individual files, all the Java source
files in this distribution are:

Copyright (C) Numerical Recipes Software 1986-2007
Java translations Copyright (C) Huang Wen Hui 2012

LICENSE

Numerical Recipes Software grants to any licensed user of the
Numerical Recipes Third Edition source code in C++ an additional,
non-exclusive license to use these Java translations under terms and
conditions identical to that user's existing license to use the
Numerical Recipes C++ source code.  This grant does not modify any
existing terms and conditions, nor does it grant any new C++ or Java
code license to users who are not already licensed to use Numerical
Recipes Third Edition source code in C++.  This grant is subject to,
and conditional on, the license grant by Huang Wen Hui given below.

For information on Numerical Recipes licenses, including both personal
single-user licenses and institutional subscriber licenses, see
http://www.nr.com/aboutNR3license.html .

Note that owning a copy of the Numerical Recipes book, or purchasing a
subscription to the electronic book, is not the same as a code
license.  A code license comes with the purchase of one of (i) a
Numerical Recipes Code CDROM as published by Cambridge University
Press, or (ii) a Code Download package as purchased from Numerical
Recipes Software (see http://www.nr.com/com/storefront.html), or (iii)
an institutional subscription (see further information at
http://www.nr.com/aboutNR3institutional.html).

Huang Wen Hui represents to Numerical Recipes Software that he is the
author of these Java translations and has the right to license them.
Numerical Recipes Software itself makes no warranty or representation
as to the ownership of the translations (other than their being
derivative works of Numerical Recipes C++ source code).

Subject to the above conditions and representations, and subject to
the Disclaimer of Warranty below, Huang Wen Hui grants to all users a
perpetual, non-exclusive, royalty-free license to use these Java
translations in any manner whatsoever.

DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY

These Java translations are an unsupported product.  Numerical Recipes
Software, the authors and publisher of the Numerical Recipes books,
and Huang Wen Hui make no warranty, express or implied, that the
computer code contained herein is free of error, or is consistent with
any particular standard of merchantability, or that it will meet your
requirements for any particular application. The code should not be
relied on for solving a problem whose incorrect solution could result
in injury to a person or loss of property. If you do use the code in
such a manner, it is entirely at your own risk. The authors and
publisher disclaim all liability for direct or consequential damages
resulting from your use of the code.
